Hi, Mystery Recapped here.
Today, I am going to explain the American
drama thriller film called “Stonehearst
Asylum.”
Spoilers ahead!
Watch out and take care!
At the beginning of the movie, an Oxford University
professor demonstrates a case of female hysteria
on Eliza Graves, before his class.
She protests that she is sane, but the professor
mercilessly triggers her hysteria by touching
her inappropriately.
Any human touch sends her into a frenzied
state.
After the demonstration, he asks his assistant
to bring in the next patient.
Cut to Christmas Eve, a young doctor, Edward
Newgate from Oxford arrives at the Stonehearst Asylum
He is led by guards and the head of the guards,
Mickey Finn, into the building.
The asylum consists of two hundred residents.
Most of them are Lords and Ladies of the finest
families of Britain.
Dr. Edward is there to gain clinical experience
for his further medical practice.
He meets the superintendent of the asylum,
Dr. Silas Lamb.
Edward impresses Dr. Lamb with his will to
work with the mentally challenged.
So, Dr. Lamb invites Edward to the afternoon
rounds with him.
He introduces him to the patients of the Stonehearst.
Some think they are animals, some delusional,
while some of them are there for being homosexual.
But one patient, in particular, catches Dr.
Edward’s eyes- Lady Eliza Graves, the woman
shown at the beginning of the film.
She is in the asylum getting treated for female
hysteria.
She belongs to a noble family and is married
to a very wealthy man.
Unfortunately, Lady Eliza suffers from hysteria.
She reacts negatively to all physical touches.
She bit her abusive husband’s ear off.
So, she was sent to the asylum by her father.
Doctor Edward is fascinated by Eliza’s musical
skills.
He seemed to have charmed her as well.
Edward is surprised by Dr. Lamb’s unique
way of treating his patients.
Rather than working on fixing their problems,
he celebrated their conditions and allowed
them to live happily in their delusions.
Dr. Lamb invites Edward for a staff dinner
that night.
Many dishes lay etiquettely on the dining
table.
But Edward is surprised to see patients joining
them on the table.
According to Dr. Lamb, it is therapeutic for
the patients to mix with the polite society.
At the dinner, everyone is having cheerful
conversations until Dr. Edward mentions that
Mickey Finn is a funny name.
This causes tension in the dinner.
Everyone goes silent; but Mickey Finn starts
to laugh hysterically.
He then offers Dr. Edward a glass of alcohol.
He is about to drink it when Lady Eliza from
below the table, hits him with her legs.
Doctor drops the liquor.
Then, Eliza brings him out with an excuse
of cleaning his shirt ,and tells him to run
away from the asylum as soon as he can.
She gives no reason as to why.
That night, Edward goes to his room confused.
He prepares his gun in case he needs it in
the future.
A loud noise startles Edward.
He follows it and reaches down to the basement.
There are several people in prisons begging
for his help.
His first thought is that they are extremely
insane patients...but after a chat with them,
he realizes that they are the actual staff
and superintendent of the asylum.
Lamb was actually a patient who led a mutiny.
He locked up the staff, and let the patients
run things (including Finn).
Among the prisoners are the actual superintendent
of the asylum, Dr. Benjamin Salt, two nurses,
a health guide, and many others.
They were given a drink with some drugs and
brought down to the basement.
Edward realizes that he would have ended up
like them if Lady Eliza hadn’t saved him
today.
Horrified, Edward rushes to tell Eliza the
truth.
But she already knows all of it.
In fact, she is one of the lunatics who helped
Dr. Lamb imprisoned the staff.
The next day, Lamb takes Edward and Micky
Finn with him on his afternoon rounds.
They make Edward go into a lunatic’s room
to change his dressing.
The lunatic is terrifying to look at.
When Edward initially approaches him, he is
attacked by the man.
He is almost about to choke Edward to death, but soon, he notices the name “Arthur” written
on the wall.
Edward assumes that it is the lunatic’s
name so he calls him Arthur.
This finally calms the man down.
Dr. Lamb is impressed but Edward ends up with
many injuries after the encounter.
Lady Eliza looks after his wounds.
Edward tells her about his intentions of freeing
the prisoners and running away with them.
At that time, she reveals that back then,
Stonehearst Asylum was a cruel place for the
patients....where they were experimented upon
by Dr. Salt.
His ways and ideas matched that of a devil’s.
Lamb, Mickey Finn, Eliza, the cooks, and the
guards were all the victims of Dr. Salt’s
cruel method.
He touched Eliza inappropriately to trigger
her hysteria with an excuse of finding her
a cure, he applied severe water pressure on
some of his patients and kept them in the
running water for days.
According to Dr. Salt, a patient’s worst
fear is the way to cure their madness.
But he struggled to find Lamb’s worst fear.
Dr. Salt performed all kinds of terrifying
procedures on Lamb when he was a patient.
Lamb and other patients had come to despise
Dr. Salt so they planned for months, the way
to free themselves of the torture.
Finally, one day, they spiked the doctor and
staff’s drink and imprisoned them.
Lamb took Dr. Salt’s place as the chief
of the asylum, and let the patients live freely.
He employed some of them as the gatekeepers,
some as cooks, and some as nurses.
He gave all their life a purpose and made
Stonehearst a happy place.
After hearing the story, Edwards promises
that she will never again have to suffer the
way that she has.
Shortly, Edward impresses everyone in the
asylum.
An old lady had refused to eat until her son
comes from war.
Edward poses as her son and lovingly feeds
the lady.
Seeing this encounter, Eliza is more drawn
towards Edward.
His kindness has impressed her.
The pair starts to fall in love with each
other.
Edward tries to persuade her to run away with
him from the asylum but Eliza is doubtful
of the idea.
Not long after, Edward is called by Dr. Lamb
Dr. Lamb wants Edward to assist him in an
experimental procedure on Dr. Salt.
He ties him to the bed.
Dr Lamb claims that Dr. Salt is a lunatic
who believes himself to be the rightful superintendent
of Stonehearst, and he needs a therapy.
This therapy is called “Electrotherapy”.
Then, in front of Edward, Dr Lamb hits the
switch, electrocuting him.
He asks Edward to do the same.
After the electrotherapy, Dr. Salt loses all
of his memory.
The next day is the new year 1900.
Everyone in Stonehearst is celebrating and
happy.
Edward intends to set the prisoners free tonight.
A ceremony takes place.
Everyone is dancing as Dr. Lamb watches them.
Elsewhere, Edward knows Dr. Lamb has some
good inside him.
So, he sets out to find it.
In Lamb’s room when he was a patient, Edward
finds a hidden picture inside the wall, and
takes it with him.
Everyone goes outside the building to celebrate
the coming of the new century.
But Edward stays inside to spike the champagne
with a chemical that will make everyone unconscious.
However, Mickey Finn catches him in the act.
After an intense fight, Edward frees himself
from Finn.
The spiked champagne is brought to the celebration
and distributed to everyone.
But as they are about to drink it, Mickey
Finn stops them, and Edward's act is caught.
Dr. Lamb hits him with a bottle.
When Edward opens his eyes, he is tied to
a hospital bed and is being taken into the
electrotherapy room.
Dr. Edward is about to be electrocuted as
Dr. Salt did.
Just then, Eliza comes into the room with
Edward’s pocket watch.
It has a picture of Eliza on it.
She assumes that her husband had sent Edward
to get her out of the asylum.
She asks him for his real intentions for coming
into the asylum.
He reveals that six months ago, he
was in a medical lecture where a doctor displayed
Eliza and her medical disability.
He felt so pitiful and saddened by her condition,
he vowed to save her from that hell.
This was the real reason Edward had come to
the Stonehearst Asylum.
As he is being taken away, he asks Eliza to
run away from the asylum.
Just as Dr. Lamb is about to electrocute him,
Edward requests a final will.
His request is to give Eliza Graves the picture
that is in his pocket.
But in reality, the picture is the one Edward
had found in Lamb’s room.
Dr. Lamb takes a look at it, and he is shocked.
The picture is the root cause of his madness.
It is revealed that Dr. Lamb was a real doctor
in the war.
He had to kill his soldier friends to free
them of the pain.
He had shot each of them to death, and had
tried to kill himself too, but he ran out
of bullets.
This turned him insane with time.
The picture Edward showed him was the picture
of one of Lamb’s soldier friends.
So, it triggered his madness again.
Dr. Lamb runs away from there.
Seeing this, Mickey Finn decides to perform
the procedure on Edward himself.
But Eliza comes to Edward’s aid.
The whole asylum watches them fight cheerfully.
However, Finn triggers her hysteria by touching
her trigger point, sending her into a frenzied
state.
Edward manages to calm her down.
Raynaldo, put one here
Then, the fight continues.
Mickey Finn finally gets electrocuted and
burns to death.
But the fire spreads around and the room starts
burning.
Eliza runs to save the prisoners from the
basement...while Edward goes looking for Lamb.
He finds him in the hallway; out of his mind
and deluded.
So, Edward brings him outside with other patients.
All of them are safe now.
Everything is over.
Edward wants Eliza to come to a new place
with him, but Eliza refuses.
They kiss their last goodbye...when Edward
tells Eliza that he has a final secret to share
It is now a few months later.
Stonehearst has become back to normal, and
is better than ever.
The true head nurse appears to be running
things some time later, caring for the patients
now...including Salt and Lamb.
The Oxford professor from the beginning of
the movie and Eliza Graves’ husband arrive
at the asylum to release her.
But they are surprised to be informed that
Dr. Edward had already discharged her three
weeks ago.
The men are surprised to hear this because
the professor himself is Dr. Edward Newgate;
THE REAL Dr. Edward
He explains that the person who came here
posing as a doctor was actually a patient
of his.
He had seen Eliza Graves in a medical demonstration
at Oxford.
Then he ran away from an asylum in London
with Dr. Edward’s belongings and stole his identity
All in order to save Eliza Graves.
At the end of the movie, we see Mrs. Graves
and the imposter Newgate in Tuscany, Italy.
They are now known as Dr. and Mrs. Lamb.
The two dance happily...and embrace in the
garden of what appears to be another asylum,
run peacefully by nuns.
That’s the ending of the movie “Stonehearst
Asylum”.
Now, for the explanation.
Edward has been a mentally ill patient all
along.
He suffers from a condition called pseudologia
fantastica, more commonly known as pathological lying
It is a condition where a person constantly
lies for no personal gain.
Edward had been doing this for years.
We never come to know his real name.
But despite of his disorder, he possesses
the unique qualities of love and empathy.
His love and empathy for mentally ill people
like him made him able to help those people.
Even Eliza's fear of touch is cured because
of him.
Because of this, Edward is able to act like
a sane and normal person.
The audience will not think that he is a madman.
Edward's character is built very strongly.
One of the messages conveyed from this film
is about how great the power of love is.
It is even capable of conquering the greatest
human suffering: an insane soul.
Subscribe for more videos like this.
Turn on the notifications and leave a like
to help the channel out.
Thank you for watching.